going to speak now to Tian Hassan who's
in New York she's Executive Director of
Human Rights Watch thank you very much
indeed for being with us I understand
that this report has produced a lot of
interest and you've been doing uh
several press conferences uh as a result
of that I'd like to ask you uh about
your assessment of the situation in Gaza
compared to the uh other 99 uh countries
that you have been monitoring over the
last
year um well Human Rights Watch doesn't
do a ranking
um of human suffering but what we can
say is that the situation in Gaza is
dire through our research since the
beginning of the conflict Human Rights
Watch has documented um war crimes being
committed including um uh the crime of
starvation as a weapon of War um also
Collective punishment through the
Restriction to F to basic food water
fuel um and life-saving humanitarian
assistance which has been imposed by uh
the isra blockade so you know the
situation in Gava is desperate and it
requires uh a immediate response from
the international community and what
we've seen today I think with the
international court of justice uh
hearing South Africa's application uh
that uh they are arguing that uh Israel
has uh violated its obligations under
the genocide convention is an important
signal for the people of Gaza and to the
world that there must be accountability
for war crimes that are being committed
in Gaza but throughout this conflict all
parties to the conflict must abide by
International humanitarian law and they
must be uh held to account when that is
violated um how confident can you be
that those on both sides of this
conflict will ultimately be held
accountable as you
say you know the question of
accountability
uh is a is a difficult one but I don't
think it's an option for us to think
that it's not achievable when we are
dealing with human suffering and we are
dealing with uh violations of
international law at this scale where
thousands of people have been killed
including thousands of children we are
seeing you know the violations of
international law the tenants of
international law like the targeting of
humanitarian workers uh the killing of
journalists um the targeting or and the
destruction of hospitals and medical
facilities it is important for our
common Humanity uh that we ensure that
these do not go that there is
accountability and that these crimes are
not we do not look away um you know
there have also been crimes that were
committed inside Israel and they also
demand accountability but this is not
the only conflict in the world where we
see the world looking away and not
bringing the full forced rigor that is
required to bring Justice and
accountability and to stop civilian
suffering the situation in Sudan for
example in the DAR for region has fallen
off the agenda we see thousands of
people who have been displaced women who
have been victims of sexual violence and
the targeting of the maset ethnic group
um and you know that that has received
no International attention and requires
the same level of commitment to ensure
accountability that we saw in contexts
like Ukraine where we saw the
International Community throw all of the
tools in the human rights and
accountability toolkit at the situation
we saw investigations we've seen ICC
referrals we've seen um domestic uh in
investigations by countries who um were
prepared to put resources in to
investigate and prosecute uh war crimes
in Ukraine and if anything Ukraine shows
us what is possible when the world
stands up and takes violations of
international humanitarian law seriously
and we should expect nothing less from
the other conflicts in the world from
Myanmar to Ethiopia to Sudan to Gaza we
and Al jaer regularly cover uh reports
that are released by Human Rights Watch
and other Aid organizations around the
world so many of them are filled with
Tales of of of tragedies and harrowing
stories of per of personal suffering
what do you think it takes to refocus
attention onto the these crises around
the world Gaza is the one at the moment
but you mentioned Sudan of course what
does it take to re-engage governments
and people as individuals to get more
involved and take action on situations
like
this well the the key is that we need to
end two really damaging practices that
Human Rights Watch documented as growing
Trends in
2023 um and that is double standards
when we see the International Community
mobilized for some situations and not
for others um because this sends a
message um that some lives are worth
more than others and that erodes trust
in the international institutions which
we rely on like the UN Security Council
like the courts uh like the general
assembly that we rely on to deliver
human rights and ensure accountability
so then enter double standards and for
states to stop being able to cherry-pick
um and being selective about where they
ensure that International humanitarian
law and international law are
implemented um because you have to
remember human rights are not a nice to
have these rights emerged out of the
darkest times in humanity they were
agreed upon by countries all over the
world and they are law they are and when
countries step outside of those laws or
they violate those laws they need to be
held accountable it doesn't matter who
they they are what region they're in um
or who their world leaders are or who
their world leaders are friends with
accountability is for everyone and the
second practice that we need to see is
that we have seen an alarming rise in
States beginning to to engage in what we
call transactional diplomacy where they
turn a blind eye to human rights abusers
in exchange for meeting some sort of
short-term domestic need which could be
around uh natural resources security um
or migration and increasingly we've seen
everything from the catastrophic EU um
the EU migration deals with countries
like Tunis and Libya where the EU has
just turned a blind eye to the serious
abuses uh that are happening in those
countries and against um uh refugees and
migrants in those countries in exchange
for keeping migrants and refugees out of
the European block this simply just
enable sends a message that these
governments AR accountable um and it
emboldens them to go even further and as
a result we saw countries for example uh
like Rwanda who have taken their
repression uh across borders where
they're pursuing uh where there's been
no accountability for abuses at home and
now they're beginning to hunt down uh
journalists human rights Defenders uh
and political dissidents abroad from
Sydney to Paris so what it's going to
take is clear um in and consistent uh
and committed action from all states um
in all contexts TI Hassan is Executive
Director of Human Rights Watch we
appreciate you being with us thank you
very much indeed